[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm
Lisa Garr, and welcome.
Today, we're going to be talking
about stress specifically
and how to reduce it.
And we're going to be talking
about that by understanding
the scientific connection
between the heart
and the brain.
Joining me today
is Howard Martin.
He is the vice
president of HearthMath
and also the co-author of
"The Heartmath Solution."
And he is also on the
Global Steering Committee
of the Global
Coherence Initiative.
So welcome to the show.
Thanks for joining me.
>>HOWARD MARTIN: Lisa,
thank you so much.
Glad to be here with you today.
>>LISA: Great to have you.
So HeartMath has gained a lot
of recognition in the industry,
and it is a very
reputable organization.
Tell our listeners about what
it is and what exactly do you
do there?
>>MARTIN: Well,
thanks for asking.
I'm very proud of what's been
accomplished in these 20 years
with HearthMath.
This year is our
20th anniversary.
>>LISA: 20 years.
>>MARTIN: Time
has really flown--
>>LISA: Wow.
>>MARTIN: Since we started
HeartMath back in 1991.
What HeartMath is, really,
is a system consisting
of methods, techniques,
and technology,
all underpinned with
scientific research,
which is one of the things that
sort of makes us just a little
different.
And it's been designed
very carefully
to help empower people during
these changing times we all
live in.
The system was created
by Doc Childre, who's
been my long-time friend
for many, many years now,
who really started
and created HeartMath.
And he's the chairman of
all the organizations today.
>>LISA: So why an
organization like HeartMath?
Why does it exist?
What is the need that
it is fulfilling?
>>MARTIN: Well,
back when we first
started HeartMath it
was born from care,
really, Doc's care and
my care and others' that
were associated with it.
We had gone through a lot
of periods in our lives
where we had done what we could
to improve ourselves as people.
It was not an
ambition-driven start for us.
It was not the
kind of thing where
we've got a great
idea now and we
have to go out and
share it with the world.
It had a maturation
process to it.
And at a certain point, we felt
that the caring thing to do
would be to share whatever
we had gained, whatever
we had learned with others.
But yet, in our society
today, through the roar
of ambition and survival, we
often end up living neck up--
>>LISA: Sure.
>>MARTIN: --as we do, stress.
>>LISA: Yes, and
how this relates.
So now, in
understanding stress--
and I'm loving this conversation
today because not only
are we talking about
how to reduce stress,
but how to go from stressed
to a place of coherence, which
is, as you explain, different.
It's different than relaxation.
>>MARTIN: Sure.
>>LISA: It's a different state.
>>MARTIN: Let's talk
about stress for a minute.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: Not necessarily
the most scintillating topic
that people want to hear about.
>>LISA: It's a very
important topic, yes.
>>MARTIN: It is.
But stress is something
that most people experience
today in-- at levels that
haven't experienced it before.
The changes occurring in
our world, the changes
in our personal lives, all
that can be very disconcerting.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>MARTIN: We're living
in an era that's
going through such a
high-speed period of change.
Very, very stressful,
statistically
it bears all that out.
Stress is debilitating.
When we experience
too much stress,
it has a big impact on our
health, negative impact.
It robs us of the
quality of life.
Many things come from
having too much stress.
>>LISA: I want to
break that down
into two different things,
two different types of stress.
>>MARTIN: Sure.
>>LISA: The stress
that comes from outside
in, where people are
losing their homes,
they're being laid
off from their jobs
right before holidays, they're
experiencing an enormous amount
because of our
economy and situations
that are happening in our media.
It seems to really label and
emphasize a lot of stress
for people.
So that's one type of stress.
The other thing is
the chemical reactions
that happen in the body
when stress occurs--
the cortisol release, the fight
or flight-- all of those things
that break the
immune system down.
So there's the external
stress and then
there's the internal stress.
>>MARTIN: And the
effect of stress
that happens
internally in our body.
People think about the external
things as their stress--
losing the home, losing the
job, those kind of things.
And, yeah, those
events are stressful.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: That's a given.
But researchers for
years used to do,
even the earliest research
on stress-- Hans Selye
and these different people that
were doing research on stress--
said that stress
was not the events,
it was the perception
of the events.
We were perceiving the
event in a certain way
and, therefore,
it was stressful.
What we've learned at HeartMath,
at the Institute of HeartMath,
and what I've
learned personally is
it's not just the
perception of the events,
it's what happens emotionally
when we have that perception.
The emotions are really where
the stress is being registered.
And when we experience strong
negative emotions, like anxiety
or frustration or anger or
disappointment, those kind
of emotions, a lot goes on
in the body that's not good.
You mentioned hormones--
it releases hormones
into our system that
are not good for us
when they are there
in excessive amounts.
No hormone is bad, but it's
about the hormone relationships
and balances.
Too much cortisol, for example.
Cortisol is generically
known as the stress hormone--
>>LISA: Stress
hormone, right, uh-huh.
>>MARTIN: Too much cortisol
does a lot of things
to our physical
body we don't want.
Too much adrenaline--
the same thing.
And these are both hormones
that are directly related
to the stress response.
To understand how to
better regulate stress,
we have to learn how to better
regulate emotional responses.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: So to manage the
stress response to that is not
as much important
to say we're not
going to have those
feelings; it's
what do we do with
them when we have them.
How fast can we move
out of those emotions
into something that's
at least neutralized
those negative feelings or
possibly transformed them
into something else that's
regenerative and positive.
>>LISA: And one
of the big topics
we're going to be talking
about today is resilience
and how to deal with it, why
we-- big factors in stress.
But I want to back
up for a minute,
because in the beginning I
talked about we are going
to be understanding the
scientific connection
between the heart and the brain.
>>MARTIN: Sure.
Today we know that
the heart actually
communicates with the brain and
the rest of the body in four
distinct ways.
The first way is neurologically.
In your heart and my heart,
and everyone's heart,
there's a complex
nervous system.
It's studied through a field
called neurocardiology.
Those guys actually call
it the brain in the heart.
>>LISA: The brain in the heart?
>>MARTIN: In the heart, yeah.
So it's a sophisticated
nervous system
found in our heart, communicates
with the big brain in the head.
It does it through
a nerve pathway
that starts in the heart
and travels upward.
I never knew this.
It comes in through the
lower brain centers,
it goes right in through
the limbic system,
which is where the emotional
centers of the brain are.
But then, where it
gets interesting
is it terminates all the
way in the neocortex.
The higher perceptual
thinking part of our brain
is getting information
from our heart.
>>LISA: Most think that it goes
from the brain to the heart--
>>MARTIN: Correct.
>>LISA: --as opposed
to the opposite, OK.
>>MARTIN: Yeah,
with the information
going from the brain
down to the heart
is simply controlling the
timing of the heartbeat.
That's it.
When you map out neurological
traffic in the body,
it's clearly seen that
the heart is actually
sending a lot more
information to the brain
than it ever receives
from the brain.
And that's just one way
the heart's communicating.
It does it through something
called a blood pressure wave.
When we put our hand on our
wrist, we feel their pulse,
it's actually a wave
of energy created
by the squeezing
of the heart that's
pushing the blood
through the body.
That blood pressure
wave modulates
a lot of the body's systems.
Brain wave activity,
for example,
is synchronized
to changes taking
place in the blood
pressure wave.
That's called a
biophysical communication.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>MARTIN: There's
another fascinating fact.
This is another one,
who knew, right?
1983, all the way
back then, the heart
was actually classified as
part of our hormonal system.
It produces hormones.
>>LISA: Well, interesting.
>>MARTIN: Nobody knew this.
So there's hormones like
atrial peptide and oxytocin
that are being
produced by the heart.
>>LISA: From the heart?
>>MARTIN: So there's a
biochemical conversation
happening as well.
Now, these freeways, Lisa,
are all biological-- hardwired
biological processes.
Definitively, without
a doubt showing
that the heart is doing
more than pumping blood.
But where it gets interesting
for me is the fourth way.
Our hearts are
electrical organs.
They're energy-producing
organ in our body.
And that's what
a doctor measures
is that energy, when
we get our ECG or EKG.
They're measuring
an electrical signal
being produced by the
beating of the heart.
Now, that signal is strong.
It's the strongest source of
bioelectricity in our body,
40 to 60 times stronger than
the second most powerful source,
which is the brain.
40 to 60 times.
>>LISA: Interesting,
so it is actually
emitting a stronger
signal than the brain.
>>MARTIN: 40 to
60 times stronger.
>>LISA: 40 to 60 times stronger.
>>MARTIN: Now, that signal--
the electrical energy
from that signal goes to
every single cell in our body,
and it permeates
every single cell.
Here's where it
gets interesting.
It creates an electromagnetic
field of energy
that surrounds you and me--
>>LISA: The body?
>>MARTIN: --in 360 degrees,
extending beyond the skin
out into space.
In the book "The
HeartMath Solution"
that I had the
privilege of writing
with Doc Childre, the
HeartMath founder,
we reported on another
clinic's finding
that said they measured it 8
to 10 feet outside of the body.
>>LISA: Really?
>>MARTIN: Our researchers
say they can reliably
stand behind 3 to 4 feet.
So we have these fields.
>>LISA: How do you measure?
So our body has an
electrical system
and it's going through the 3
trillion cells in the body,
and then that emanates out into
something called a human energy
field?
>>MARTIN: It's energy field.
It's not an aura; it's
not subtle energy.
It's electromagnetic energy
we're measuring in this case.
>>LISA: And so if somebody
walks in the room who is angry,
and you feel that,
it's an actual field?
>>MARTIN: That's one
possible explanation.
The field changes.
First of all, the
field goes-- it's
radiating out or
broadcasting out.
The energy in the field,
the frequency, so to speak,
in the field will
change depending
upon what emotional
state we're in.
If you're feeling
anger, for example,
or frustrated, or
nervous, or whatever;
it's usually producing what's
called an incoherent spectrum--
a lot of frequencies
inharmoniously trying
to exist in the same place.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: When we switch
the emotional state
and we begin to feel emotions
that are associated with heart,
like, let's say, deep care for
someone or something or love,
or appreciation for,
hey, life is good,
that field will change
and becomes more ordered.
It's called the
coherent spectrum.
And so we are literally
broadcasting our emotions out
in the space through this field.
>>LISA: So the anger
and the frustration
is more of a frenetic; the
love, the appreciation,
the gratitude is more coherent?
And that's the field
that literally you feel?
>>MARTIN: Yeah, so we may
feel that from someone.
That's one explanation--
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>MARTIN: --for why are
we can walk into a room,
we see two people,
they look normal,
but yet we don't feel
that something's right.
And we ask them if
there's anything going on,
we find out they've been having
an argument, for example.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: This not saying
scientifically definitively
that that's why
we understand it,
but it's one way we may
be able to explain it.
Here's why.
When we go to this understanding
of heart communication,
now we're out of just biology,
now we're into physics.
We're in the energy fields.
How does this field relate
to the field in our brain?
How does my field
and your field,
how are our fields
relating to one another--
>>LISA: Right now.
>>MARTIN: --right now.
And then where we've
gone with it now
and where we'll talk about
some more in our dialogue today
is how does the field produced
by my heart and the field
collectively of humanity
relate to one another?
And then how do those fields
relate to the energy fields
produced by the
planet, the Earth
itself, that whole
energetic connection.
>>LISA: The micro
to the macro, yes.
>>MARTIN: Exactly.
>>LISA: So it goes
beyond what you
see when you get on a treadmill
and you put your little thumb
in the thing, and you
see your heart rate
and how fast it's beating
when you're on the treadmill,
and so forth.
It goes beyond what the
doctor shows you in an EKG.
It goes beyond all of those
just parts of evidence.
This is something that goes
into the human energy field
and it's centered in the
heart and sends a message
to the brain.
>>MARTIN: It becomes a really
interesting thought process
of how do we relate as human
beings to something larger.
And the heart is playing the
central role in all of that.
And I think what's important
is that heart and brain are not
in competition;
they work together.
It's a hard-wired system.
But we've somehow believed
that all intelligence is only
happening in our brain.
And what I believe
from my own experience
is that the brain is a master
interpreter of information,
that it sorts, compares,
compartmentalizes,
tries to make sense out of
information that it receives.
But is not the only source of
where we get intelligence from.
>>LISA: Let's talk about some of
the specific causes of stress.
You mentioned to me that
there's two causes of stress.
>>MARTIN: Most of
the surveys show
that either number
one or number two
is going to be one
of these two things.
One is the feeling of
not having enough time.
>>LISA: The feeling of
not having enough time?
Constantly being rushed?
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
>>LISA: Do you think
any of that's brought
on by the information and
the technology age, and--
>>MARTIN: Absolutely, yeah.
>>LISA: I mean everything is
so instantaneous and designed
to be more convenient, more
convenient, more convenient,
so you can do more in less time.
>>MARTIN: Yeah, we're actually
getting more information
than we were designed to get.
Our physiology hasn't
even caught up yet
with being able to absorb
that much information.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>MARTIN: And we stay dialed
in and wired and connected
to everything all the time--
>>LISA: Constantly.
>>MARTIN: --and
that's part of it,
certainly, the feeling
of not have enough time.
But we also-- time is
actually, in a sense,
speeding up as well.
More events are happening in a
space of time than ever before.
So the feeling that people
are having about not
having enough time or about
the overwhelm of it all--
>>LISA: Is that documented?
Is that really documented?
>>MARTIN: I don't know if it'd
be documented in a totally
empirical way, but,
certainly, I think,
if you step back and
think about your own life,
are more things happening?
Do you feel more things going
on than you ever have, right?
>>LISA: Absolutely, but I
don't know if it's just me
or if it's just what
people are talking about.
Is it really--
>>MARTIN: Well, it's
pretty much universal
in my experience of asking
people what they feel and about
do they feel like things are
speeding up in their life.
Now, I've played with that
in some of my experiments.
I might be in a cab with
a cabdriver taking me
from the airport and
I'll say, do you ever
think your life's getting
faster than it was before?
And I get 100% yes
back every time
when I ask questions like that.
>>LISA: I'm not
sure you could ever
quantify that and
double-blind study it.
>>MARTIN: I don't know if
we need to quantify it.
>>LISA: Review it.
>>MARTIN: People are
actually experiencing
that in their own life.
It's that feeling of
not having enough time,
too much to do, not enough time,
the overwhelmed feeling that's
one of the primary causes of
stress, usually number one
or two in a stress survey.
The second cause is feeling
that you're not in control.
And that's a person, let's say--
>>LISA: So you
don't have choice.
>>MARTIN: You don't have choice.
You're in job.
Your boss tells you what to do.
You have to do it.
You can't do anything about it.
That's a feeling that creates
a tremendous amount of stress.
You're locked into situations in
life that you can't get out of.
You're doomed.
You have no choice.
You're going through these
feelings of resignation
and disappointment that leads to
these very stressful feelings--
they're sadness and depression
feelings, and things like that.
They're all part of
what stress really is.
>>LISA: Interesting,
right, of course.
And then the cardiologists
will always tell you,
you need to reduce your stress.
>>MARTIN: Right.
Easier said than done.
>>LISA: And change your diet.
So this can all be fixed
through stress and diet.
And you walk out of there
going stress and diet, what
do I do about that?
>>MARTIN: Exactly, yeah.
>>LISA: So exactly how
do you reduce the stress?
>>MARTIN: Well, that's
where HeartMath comes in.
And we do lots of different
kinds of training programs,
resilience-based training,
performance improvement
training, personal growth
training through our Heart
Mastery program that we have.
A lot of things
that we do in there.
Stress is usually somewhere
in that training process
to begin to look
at that and deal
with it, because,
again, we want to be
able to remove some the things
that stand in our way of having
these fulfilling
and meaningful lives
and contributing to this
change we're experiencing
in the world in a dynamic way.
We have to get the blocks out.
So we do focus on that some.
But see, there's a
state that we can
enter into that's measurable
by looking at heart,
again, that sort
of offsets stress
could be looked at almost in a
way as an antidote to stress.
And it's a state
called coherence.
There's a medical term for it--
psychophysiological coherence.
That's a mouthful for
a southerner to say,
but it's a long word.
Psychophysiological coherence.
And coherence is a
highly-ordered state
physiologically, when
all of our body systems
are working together.
They are synchronizing
to changes in our heart.
If you think about
the heart, it's
the master rhythm
maker in the body.
It's setting the tempo; it's
setting the tone for everything
that's happening internally.
All the other system synchronize
to heart-- respiration,
digestion, hormonal response,
immune system response--
>>LISA: Blood pressure.
>>MARTIN: All triggering
off our heart, right?
So when you're in
the coherence state,
the rhythmic beating
patterns of the heart,
which we call heart rhythms,
become very nice and ordered.
There's a synchronization in the
rhythmic beating of the heart.
All the other systems are
synchronizing to that,
and you have this very
efficient physiological state,
where less energy
is being wasted.
>>LISA: This is something we're
going to see later is these
actual--
>>MARTIN: We'll see that, yeah.
But it's also
psychophysiological,
which means there's a
psychological component.
Coherence is often triggered
by feeling positive emotions.
And they're the ones
associated with heart.
When we're feeling care
or love or compassion,
we generally have
an opportunity to be
triggering the coherent state.
>>LISA: So it goes
back to feeling?
>>MARTIN: Back to feeling.
And once we're in the coherent
state, then those emotions,
those kind of emotions
become much easier to feel.
>>LISA: So to come up with
that feeling yourself?
>>MARTIN: To generate
it from the inside.
>>LISA: To generate
>>MARTIN: And as-- we'll go
through techniques as we go
through our dialogue today,
you'll-- we'll give people ways
in which it can help them do
that using associative memory
and things to trigger
emotional responses that are
regenerative.
But all this adds up to you can
measure this whole thing that's
going on in the body.
You do it through
looking at heart rhythms.
Heart rhythms, there's a
medical term for that, too.
It's called heart rate
variability analysis-- HRV.
>>LISA: HRV, OK.
>>MARTIN: What that's measuring
is not just a heart rate,
like you get on a pulse
monitor on a piece of exercise
equipment that's telling you
75 beats a minute or whatever.
If we go to a doctor,
and the doctor says,
Lisa, your heart rate
is 75 beats a minute,
what that doctor actually told
you was that's an average.
An average is 75 beats a minute.
It wasn't beating at 75
beats for the minute.
>>LISA: OK, right, my average.
>>MARTIN: Yeah, so the
timing between each heartbeat
is actually subtly changing
between every single heart
beat.
And when you analyze
those subtle changes,
you're doing heart rate
variability analyses.
So you're measuring the
variability that's happening,
not just the
standard heart rate.
We want a lot of variability,
that's a sign of health.
We want a wide range of
speeds at which our heart can
pump and do its
cardiovascular job.
We also want to have some
ability to modulate or control
those heart rhythms,
so that rather
than them being chaotic and
irregular, they are more smooth
and ordered.
Many things affect
heart rhythms.
Movement, right
now our speech is
going to make them
jagged to some degree,
because the heart is having to--
>>LISA: OK, so movement.
>>MARTIN: Listen,
it's fine, but emotion
triggers lots of changes
in our heart rhythms.
And researchers didn't know
this until our scientists
at the Institute of HeartMath
began to uncover these things.
They really hadn't studied it
from the emotional perspective.
So what your viewers are
seeing now on the screen
are heart rate
variability analysis data.
In the top view of
that graph-- and we're
looking at 200 seconds
of time on each graph--
you see a very jagged
and irregular pattern.
And that is a person that is
not moving, they're not talking,
there's no reason for it
to be jagged and irregular,
but they are feeling a
feeling of frustration.
>>LISA: Oh, they're
not moving, OK.
>>MARTIN: In the
experiment, we just said,
think about something that
makes you feel frustrated.
And what you see is a lot of
timing changes happening in
over a short time span,
speeding up and slowing down,
and speeding up
and slowing down.
And this kind of
pattern is happening.
>>LISA: That's irregular.
>>MARTIN: It's sending
signals through the body that
cascade, like up into
the brain, for example.
And when those signals get
into the brain or cascade
in the brain, it
creates a condition
called cortical inhibition.
The higher perceptual
centers are less active.
They begin to shut down, so
we don't think as clearly.
>>LISA: So we're not as smart.
>>MARTIN: And we can even
have reaction things going,
like we knock something over--
>>LISA: Ah, clumsy.
>>MARTIN: --whatever, we don't
even have full-brain capacity.
Now, in the bottom
view on that graph,
we see this pretty
sine wave-like pattern.
This is actually the same
person a few minutes later.
But now we've asked them to feel
the feeling of appreciation,
appreciate something
in your life.
So they're shifting
from feeling frustrated
to feeling appreciative.
And the heart rhythms
respond accordingly
to the change they made
in their emotional state.
When you have the sine
wave-like pattern,
that is what coherence
looks like in the body.
Coherence is this
highly-ordered state.
It's kind of like
being in the flow
or being in the zone,
an athlete in the zone.
It's a very aware state.
It's not a sleepy-time,
just relaxed state.
It's a state where you are
operating really at your best.
>>LISA: So the antidote
to stress is coherence?
>>MARTIN: Correct.
And you can measure
coherence by looking
at changes in our heart rhythms.
Coherence and stress can't
live in the same room.
>>LISA: Law of physics, yeah.
>>MARTIN: Coherence
will move stress out.
So we learn to
shift these emotions
and learn to get more
in the coherent state,
then we can better
manage our stress.
And there's great
benefit in that.
We can improve our
health that way,
we can certainly perform better
in life, we communicate better.
>>LISA: Better
relationships, yeah, overall.
>>MARTIN: You got it.
>>LISA: So now, how does
that experience with us
physiologically affect
the, as you said earlier,
the environment and then,
ultimately, affect the planet?
How does that-- how
does one little person?
>>MARTIN: Well, certainly,
as one little person,
we are still putting
out an energy
that's contributing
to the consciousness
climate of the planet.
>>LISA: Consciousness climate?
>>MARTIN: That's what I
like to call it, yeah.
In other words, we live
in a field of energy
that's reflecting back to us.
Not just what we
think in our minds,
but what we feel in our hearts.
>>LISA: Constantly around
us, there's fields of energy.
>>MARTIN: All the time.
And we have our own field.
We produce our own field.
And it's measurable through
that one type of measurement
that we talked about
earlier, but there's
more fields and more fields
that we're producing ourself.
So we are creating our own
field environment all the time.
And what feeds that
field environment?
Our emotions.
Our emotions are
changing the energy
that goes into the field.
And that energy's
going out from us.
>>LISA: So we're affecting
it, the external situation
is not affecting us?
>>MARTIN: Well, internal
situation can affect us,
but we also affect it.
There's a relationship
between the two.
And we have more conscious
control over that
than we've ever realized before.
>>LISA: So, OK, for example,
a friend of mine cannot stand
going through airport security.
Feels like she
doesn't have choice,
feels like she
doesn't have control.
So she goes to the situation
with anxiety around that.
Now, in her mind,
it's that situation
that's causing her the stress,
because beforehand she'll
be fine.
And then she goes up
to that situation,
and I see her body
start to tense up,
and I see the
experience, and then
she starts to get into an
altercation with a TSA member,
and then it goes on
from there, it cascades.
So how are you saying
that's coming from her?
It's coming from
the environment.
>>MARTIN: Well, she can control
one thing in that situation.
She can't control,
like you said,
the process of having
to go through that
to get on an airplane.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: She can't stop that.
If she wants to get
on the airplane.
>>MARTIN: If she wants
to get on the airplane,
that's what she's got to do.
So she has one
choice, and that's
her internal reaction
to that situation.
She can control that.
Just like-- I'll use another
example-- a traffic jam.
We can't control we're in
the traffic jam, right?
>>LISA: Right, OK,
that's a good one.
>>MARTIN: Now, what
are going to do?
We can only control
our reaction to it.
Now, we can either let that
traffic jam or that TSA
experience, the
screening experience,
be stressful and to
debilitate us in certain ways,
and certainly rob us of
energy as we go through it.
Or we can make a
conscious choice
to begin to shift that
perspective on it.
Doesn't mean we have to like
either one of them necessarily.
We can get to a place--
a more neutral place,
to where we're not
draining as much energy,
to where we are more
accepting of that,
more allowing of what
we have to go through.
And in doing that, that's a
perfect example, actually,
because it's these little shifts
we make day to day that add up.
That's what really makes
the difference in our lives
is the moment-to-moment,
day-to-day choices we make.
So we can change our
attitude and at least
get to a more neutral,
accepting place with it.
And that saves a lot of energy.
We're not draining energy
through this stressful reaction
to it.
>>LISA: So then
that affects, then--
you're saying that
her experience of that
and all sorts of people, just
different experiences of things
affects, then, our environment.
>>MARTIN: It affects
our own energy field.
That energy field relates
to the larger energy field,
so we're contributing to that.
As more and more people
start making these choices
within themselves to not go
through the same old reactive
patterns that we've gone through
for a long time, that they've
had enough of that-- it is time
to step up and time to move on
and to be something different.
Then, collectively
as we do that,
it begins to put out a
larger field of energy
that impacts the Earth itself.
And the Earth's energy fields,
we know, they impact us.
And so there's a
relationship there.
It's all part of the
most important things,
I think, we all do to contribute
to changing the world.
They're the things we need to
do with the organizations we're
involved in, the projects
we do, the television
shows I do-- all of that.
But the most important
thing is what are we
doing in our moment-to-moment,
day-to-day lives
on the internal level?
>>LISA: In our own hearts.
>>MARTIN: In our own hearts.
And as we learn to make
these shifts-- and these
are my heroes.
The people that make these
shifts are my heroes.
And when I watch
somebody sort of bend
an attitude, where they know
they're going to go this way
and they don't, and they find
a way to get out of themselves,
and they turn it around.
And that's the kind of
thing that inspires me.
>>LISA: So you have the-- I
mentioned earlier that you're
on the Steering Committee of
the Global Coherence Initiative.
So that in itself
is basically taking
HeartMath to the
next level, isn't it?
>>MARTIN: Well, it's an aspect.
We work in a lot of
different ways at HeartMath,
right from the very
bottom up, the ground up,
providing training programs
for the underserved,
teaching them techniques
and things that
can improve their lives.
People that don't normally
get these type of things.
And all the way through the
work we do with corporations
and health care systems, and all
the personal growth processes
we have, and our
Heart Mastery program,
and all those things that we
do-- what the Global Coherence
Initiative is is a part of
the Institute of HeartMath,
they're a nonprofit.
It's sort of the
top-down approach,
recognizing that
change begins to occur
when consciousness changes.
What can change consciousness?
The way I see the
model working in a way
is you have changing
consciousness, which
impacts changes in the
psychological paradigms,
which we base reality on.
As those begin to
shift and change,
then that filters down into
the various systems that
sort of govern how
the world functions,
and then down on the
daily lives of people.
And so it starts with
us making changes
that affect the
consciousness, then
it feeds back down
to the system.
And I think that's
what people are
aspiring to do, many now, in
this era, which generically
been called "the shift."
How do we create a
change in consciousness
that's going to create a
new world and better world?
So the Global
Coherence Initiative
says, OK, we've been doing
HeartMath for a long time.
It all started out as a process
of self-discovery and spiritual
involvement for the
founders of HeartMath.
Let's do some of that again.
>>LISA: OK, I like it
when I see organizations
that start from a personal
mission and a personal healing
process.
I always know that
they're going to make
a big impact on the world.
>>MARTIN: We never really
got away from that.
And I certainly can say,
personally, I never did.
But we went-- we've
done a lot of work
to really bring this down to
society in a different way.
But it's always been that for me
and will always be that for me.
The Global Coherence Initiative
is a little more overt
about that.
Here's what it is.
And it's a membership
organization,
where membership
is free, that has
a website at glcoherence.org.
And it brings people
together from all
around the world who want to
use their heart-focused care
and intention to
energetically make
a contribution to the
betterment of the world
and betterment of others.
And so it's done through-- you
become a member on the website
for free, if you want,
and you get access
to things like webinars
and teleseminars,
and other information
that's there.
There are a lot of
interesting people involved
in this-- other committee
members or people like Gregg
Braden, Marci Shimoff, Lynne
McTaggart, Bruce Lipton, Rollin
McCraty, Deborah
Rozman-- it goes on,
the great list of people that
are involved in all of this.
And so we put out what's
called care focuses, which
mean when we see needs
in the world, of course,
there could be something every
hour, but at certain times,
we put out care focuses,
where we ask the people who
are members to use the
power of their heart
to put that energy out,
to put that care out.
>>LISA: What's a good example
of something like that?
>>MARTIN: A natural disaster.
And we know people
are suffering.
The kind of care
focus we put out,
which Doc Childre, our
founder, puts a lot of time
into writing, would be not to
prevent this from happening
or things like that, or it'd
be to lessen the effects,
to be pragmatic about this.
How do we lessen the effects?
Another example might
be a hurricane's coming.
Rather than putting
a care focus out
that says we want to stop the
hurricane, what we put out
is let's help people deal
with the emotions associated
with the impending inconvenience
they might go through.
So we're careful on that
to be realistic about what
these things can do.
And there are many organizations
doing something similar.
And I'm glad for that.
And we partner
with some of them.
>>LISA: Yeah, that's
the whole point.
>>MARTIN: But the part we bring
to the party is in the science.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: We have
developed technology
at the Institute
of HeartMath that
measures subtle changes in
the Earth's energetic fields.
The Earth produces
energetic fields itself.
Part of the Earth
is a living system
are these energetic fields.
There are two primarily.
One's called the
geomagnetic field,
most people are
familiar with that.
That's what a compass is picking
up is the geomagnetic field.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting, OK.
>>MARTIN: It's created
by the iron core
spinning in the center of
the Earth, creating a field,
energy around the Earth.
The other's call the ionosphere.
And it's a field less dense
than the geomagnetic field, that
operates just above
the atmosphere
and goes up into space.
This is the last field
we have-- the last part
of the Earth is an
energetic system.
These fields are protective
layers around our planet.
Without the fields, there
would be no life here.
And so they're a part
of what protects us
from incoming solar
radiation, the cosmic rays,
and all these different
things that would killed us
if we didn't have these fields.
So we know these fields exist.
A lot of research has
been done already,
and more is being
done now, showing
that when these fields
begin to change--
and they change all
the time, they always
fluctuate-- that
there is impact on us.
Things like increases in
crime rates, health issues,
terrorism, even wars
have been linked
to changes in these
cycles-- solar cycles
that impact these fields.
So we know that
there's a relationship,
that the field's impacting us.
So we know it's coming this way.
So the hypothesis
that we're testing--
>>LISA: Wait, wait,
can you tell ahead
of time that those
fields are shifting
and that we will have
higher crime rates?
>>MARTIN: In a way
you can, because you
can look at the solar
activity, for example,
and know that there's
going to be an impact,
because there's been a
solar flare, et cetera.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>MARTIN: You don't know what
effect it's going to have
necessarily.
You have to look sort of back
through the rear view mirror
to see what happened
and then correlate
those things to build a picture.
But, yeah, the
solar cycles, if you
look at the data
on the solar cycles
and how they go through these
13-year solar cycle periods,
and you see that
they're attached
to certain types
of events, you can
begin to see the possibility
those events would occur again.
I'm of the belief that you can
actually offset some of that,
you can change it, but you can
see that there are potentially
events that would occur relative
to the cycles of the past.
>>LISA: So do they
affect electronics?
Do they affect human beings?
All of the above?
>>MARTIN: All of it.
>>LISA: Got it.
OK.
>>MARTIN: All if it.
They really do.
>>LISA: And so you can
look at the cycles?
OK.
>>MARTIN: Sure.
So the hypotheses we have
is that mass human emotion,
whether that's positive
emotion or negative emotion,
is also having an
impact on the fields.
>>LISA: So it's in
reverse as well?
>>MARTIN: In reverse.
The reason to believe that
is if they're affecting us,
why would we not have a
relationship to affect them?
The other thing
that's interesting
is that some of the
frequencies produced
by the-- that are
found in the ionosphere
are exactly the same
frequencies found
in the human heart and brain.
>>LISA: Really?
>>MARTIN: So we know there's
an energetic alignment--
>>LISA: As above, so below.
>>MARTIN: --alignment
between the two.
So the hypothesis is is when
we have large numbers of people
feeling something similar,
that that sends out
enough energy that impacts these
fields that can be measured.
So for instance, let's
say there's a major event.
It could be something positive.
It could be the opening of an
Olympics or something, possibly
that could be detected.
Or let's say that there's
a major disaster--
>>LISA: Space shuttle.
>>MARTIN: And
people are feeling--
all over the world are feeling
a sense of angst and upset,
and all that, that
could be measured.
And so the goal of
the project in a sense
from a scientific
perspective would
be to show that our thoughts,
our feelings, our emotions,
our prayers, our meditations,
our intentions-- all
these things that we do and
have done for thousands of years
are putting out a collective
energy that is measurable,
that is impacting
and contributing
to what goes on in the Earth
as a living system, that there
is that direct
connection to that.
Ultimately, and this
is down the road,
the science has
to be done right.
Ultimately, I'd like to be
able to say we can bring people
together in the coherent state,
a large number of people,
maybe 350,000 is an
estimate of what we need,
to be operating in another
level of coherence,
putting out care and intention
toward something that
could then be measured in
the fields, that could then
be correlated with
something positive that
occurred in society.
Now, there's a lot
of experimentation
to get that job done.
Right now we have,
for example, we
have these-- we have
monitoring sites.
We have one in
northern California.
We have one in the
United Kingdom.
We have one in Saudi Arabia.
There'll be two more
coming very, very soon,
one in northern Canada
and one in New Zealand.
And ultimately, we'll have 12.
Scientists are
looking at data now.
They're trying to make sense
out of what they're seeing.
There's a lot of filtering
that has to be done.
A lot of research to
do this in a way that
can be definitive and empirical.
So the research will
contribute to the understanding
of our spiritual nature and
our collective consciousness.
It will also contribute to
the academic understanding
of the fields themselves.
So it's both above
and below again,
and the balance that,
I think, HeartMath
tries to bring to things.
So if we do this though,
one of the committee members
is Jack Canfield, the author
of "Chicken Soup for the Soul,"
et cetera.
And he said to me
one day, Howard,
I think this could
be the greatest
experiment in the
history of the world.
>>LISA: It could be, yes, yes.
>>MARTIN: That you're going
to prove that all these things
we've believed for thousands
of years had this kind
of a relationship and impact--
>>LISA: That you could
actually quantify intention.
That you could
scientifically quantify
the field of intention.
>>MARTIN: That's right.
And so there's a lot
of potential in that.
And I think that
patience, letting
scientists do what
scientists need
to do to unfold this
in the right way
is real important, because
you don't want to blow this.
You know, in a sense, with
pseudo science or things
that you can't
really stand behind.
And to do it right would
be an amazing piece of work
that could really change
history in a way in terms
of what's being implied here.
>>LISA: How long has
the Global Coherence
Initiative existed so far?
>>MARTIN: Three years.
>>LISA: Three years.
So it's relatively young?
>>MARTIN: Oh, there's something
like 36,000-38,000 members now.
They're from 85
different countries.
>>LISA: And you do events where
you set a universal intention
with these members and--
>>MARTIN: Sometimes we do.
That's what I'm saying, that's
what a care focus would be.
Saying, you know, we-- there's
an impending economic situation
coming up.
How can we lessen
the effect of that
if we put out our
care towards it?
And again, part of the
Global Coherence Initiative
is whatever methods and
systems you use, that's fine.
We're not about
screening any of that.
People can do as they like.
They can do what they want to.
We have our coherence
building techniques
that we offer for people.
>>LISA: Which we are going
to talk about in a minute.
The idea behind this and
the big picture behind this
is that people can be a part
of something greater than them
and that they can
fulfill purpose
in life, where
there might be lack.
They can make an impact and
make a difference, where
they might feel powerless in
their own lives to do that.
And in doing that, it
starts a ripple effect--
>>MARTIN: That's right.
>>LISA: --of
helping other people
and helping in other ways.
And if you see this and it's
quantifiable on a screen,
great, then you can
go ahead and do it
in your own lives, in your
relationships, and so forth.
Yeah.
>>MARTIN: That's
good languaging.
I've always felt about
there are sciences
that-- simple ways
of looking at it
would be that the
science that we have
makes it easier for the heart
to go ahead and belie-- the head
to go ahead and
believe in the heart.
>>LISA: Yes, yes.
>>MARTIN: It also makes things
more understanding, empirical.
Some people say, well, I don't
necessarily need science.
And in some things,
I agree, you don't.
But when I can describe
this table to you,
I could describe
it to you, but when
you can see it and touch it,
it's empirical, it's solid.
And there is more
belief that the table
exists because
we're touching it.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: It is the same
way HeartMath science helps
us understand heart or
understand what love
is and things like that, things
that we know inside already--
we have an intuitive
relationship to all
these things-- but it just
adds that extra layer.
The most important
thing, I think, however,
is at this point in
HearthMath's evolution
is not to just look at us
as an organization that
does great science.
To me, it's about the
tools and the techniques,
and the lives we've
changed, and the lives we
want to help change
in the future.
That's what's most important.
What I love about the way Dr.
Childre put this together,
it was always about what
people had in themselves,
about bringing that
to the forefront,
about helping them
be what they can be,
about them reaching
their next level
for their own empowerment.
It wasn't about a
dependent system
or a personality-based
system, and things like that.
It was about what you can
do and what anyone can do,
and what we already have inside,
and how it's time for that now.
>>LISA: Right, it is.
I mean, I like that
about that, too.
It goes from a personal level
of how we're dealing with stress
in our everyday lives, which,
of course, then will affect
other people and
how we are relating
to other people in the
world, and then, of course,
affects the global
initiative, and then affects
the outer ionosphere.
>>MARTIN: And then bring
it back to home like
how we make a good choice
about what to eat for lunch.
>>LISA: And it brings it
right back to the heart.
>>MARTIN: Right
back to the heart.
>>LISA: Yep, absolutely.
>>MARTIN: That's where it
starts and ends with me.
>>LISA: So we are going to go
through some of the techniques
where we are going to actually
be able to demonstrate
to see the effectiveness
of how our thoughts affect
the rhythmic patterns
of the heart,
and then how that relates
to us on a global level.
>>MARTIN: Yeah, I want to show
the emWave technology, which
is the technology
piece that we developed
at HeartMath that people
can have for themselves
and use in their own
homes and businesses,
or whatever they do.
I want to share
that with everybody
and give you a
demonstration that you're
going to help me with.
>>LISA: Yep, absolutely.
>>MARTIN: Then I want to share
some techniques with people
or a technique particular that's
been really, really important
for me in the last year or so.
Very simple technique, but
I'm finding great value in it,
and I want the opportunity
to share it with everybody.
>>LISA: Oh,
absolutely, absolutely.
OK, we're going to do that.
We're going to
take a quick break.
And when we come
back, we're going
to set up the
technology here so we
can have a
demonstration of this.
All right, we'll be right
back with Howard Martin.
Hi, welcome back.
I'm Lisa Garr, and my guest
is Howard Martin, the vice
president-- the executive
vice president of HeartMath.
Before the break,
we were talking
about how the heart sends
information to the brain.
But how does the heart
receive information?
>>MARTIN: Well,
we definitely have
done one study that may
show that the heart is also
a receptor of information.
Sure it gets information from
the brain, controlling timing
of the heart beat, but I'm
talking about information
that applies to what we
call heart intelligence.
It's called the intuition study,
the physiology of intuition.
>>LISA: Oh, nice.
We could do-- perfect.
>>MARTIN: What our scientists
at the Institute of HeartMath
wanted to do is to
look at was there
a way to begin to
decode what happens
in the intuitive process.
So they did a study where they
had a group of test subjects,
and they were monitoring all
kinds of things on their body--
brainwave activity, skin
response, heart activity-- lots
of things being monitored
all at the same time.
Test subjects were set
in front of a computer.
They would push a button.
Indeterminate amount
of time would go on
and then a picture would emerge.
And they would push
the button again,
and another picture
would emerge.
Pictures were either
very horrific,
like very things that
are very upsetting--
>>LISA: Disturbing?
>>MARTIN: Disturbing pictures.
Or there would be very
beautiful pictures.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: And so they
just would hit the button,
sit there, and wait
for the picture.
And the picture would
emerge, and all this data
was being collected.
>>LISA: The person was
hitting the button?
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: So then,
the data began
to be analyzed from this study.
And what they found was was,
oh, my gosh, look at this.
In many cases, the
body is responding
to the upcoming
picture about 6 seconds
before the picture
actually shows up.
And they thought
this was really--
>>LISA: Interesting, yeah.
>>MARTIN: --interesting
what's happening here,
this picture's-- is
not even there yet,
but the body's doing what it
would do if the picture was
there.
>>LISA: So it's intuiting?
>>MARTIN: Intuiting
the upcoming picture.
Now where it got
more intriguing is
as they began to decode and
decode this information more--
in a more refined
way, they found
that the first physiological
responder to the picture that
wasn't there was the heart.
>>LISA: Oh, they
could measure it, wow.
>>MARTIN: 6 seconds
out the heart
began to do what it would do if
the picture was on the screen.
>>LISA: Could it tell if it was
in a love or if it was in fear,
or was it just a spike?
>>MARTIN: No, it was like being
able to tell whether it was
responding to a horrific
picture or a beautiful picture,
it was like it was
doing all that.
The brain was the
second responder.
And then the two began
to work together,
they couple together
about a second
before the picture
actually emerged.
So what this shows is
that the possibility
that the heart is a
receptor of information.
It's receiving information
from the outside.
It's picking up information
from the field, so to speak,
that we all live in--
this information field.
And what the researchers said
is it appears as if-- you know,
if something is significant,
emotionally significant,
it could be precipitating a
physiological response that
would be congruent with
the upcoming event.
>>LISA: So if you have a
feeling about a car accident
and you delay
yourself in leaving,
you'll never really see
the evidence of that,
but that could very
well be your intuition
at work being
amazingly accurate.
>>MARTIN: Finding future events,
looking at future events.
And we've had these experiences
in our lives, many people have.
I certainly have to where
certain decisions that I made
turned out to be, wow, how
did I make that choice?
And that was a very
intelligent thing to do.
In talking to the
scientists, they said,
look, it appears as if we do
have intelligences within us,
intelligence capacities
that are there all the time.
That our body, in this case, may
be scanning for future events
all the time, that
may be reading
the field, beyond time
and space into the future.
And that these are
the kinds of things
that will emerge more as
we evolve as human beings.
This type of intelligence
will come more
to the forefront of
what's normal for us.
Right now it's phenomenalistic,
it's not understood,
it feels bizarre.
But in the future, as we unfold
ourselves as human beings,
there's lots of
new ways in which
we'll be able to
perceive things.
>>LISA: Let me ask
you, just knowing all
that you know about the heart
and about the human resonance
field, and about intuition,
do you live your life any
differently now than you
did, say, 20-30 years ago?
>>MARTIN: Absolutely.
>>LISA: Before
you knew all this?
>>MARTIN: Listen, come on, yeah.
I don't know where I
would be if I hadn't
found a new connection
to my heart.
I can say that I feel like,
yeah, I'm growing-- still
growing like everyone
else, but I'm certainly
less emotionally reactive
than I've ever been.
I'm certainly kinder.
I'm certainly more
compassionate.
I'm certainly--
>>LISA: Funnier.
>>MARTIN: Maybe funnier.
Maybe even better looking.
>>LISA: Exactly.
>>MARTIN: I have to
be careful, because I
don't want to get too
good-looking for my height.
>>LISA: Well, at least,
it builds character.
>>MARTIN: That's right.
But a lot of things like that.
And I think it's hard to
describe what awareness is.
But I know my awareness
is very different,
the way I perceive things,
the way I perceive myself,
others, the world
itself, is certainly
very different than
what it would have been.
And I think what's
exciting about it
to me, Lisa, is that my life
does not have a ceiling on it,
whereas many people my
age, by now, they've
sort of topped out.
They've done what they've done.
They have basically
the awareness package
that they're going to have.
They've gone through
their careers
and reached a certain point.
Now, they're at a different
phase in their life.
But there's not a whole lot
of upper room for many people,
at least their
perception of themselves.
>>LISA: It's what causes
a lot of depression
in people who are
retired, yes, absolutely.
>>MARTIN: But the
way I feel today
is that best is yet to come it
feels like every day for me.
And that's a real gift.
And that's part of what
I mean by awareness.
It's sometimes harder to
describe the gift of awareness
that you have.
>>LISA: Well, it's interesting,
because what this does
and what we're going to
be demonstrating here
is the ability to
actually quantify
transformation in coherence.
Now, I went a little step
beyond you right there.
>>MARTIN: Now, you did.
>>LISA: I did, yeah,
on transformation,
because I was just thinking
wouldn't it be great
if you could quantify
transformation.
But what this
essentially does is
it quantifies the
field of coherence,
where transformation occurs.
>>MARTIN: Occurs, yeah.
I was looking at heart rhythms.
Remember, the stuff we talked
about earlier about heart rate
variability and about you
saw the frustrated pattern
versus the appreciative pattern,
one is inhibiting the brain,
one is opening it up, and a lot
of things are going on there.
And that that
sine-wave-like pattern
would be a representation
of what coherence looks like
in the body, the
measuring heart rhythms.
Once we understood all
this, we recognized
this is really valuable.
This is an excellent
way for people
to train themselves to be
more in the coherent state
more often.
And it can be used
for a lot of things.
So we developed the
emWave technology.
And that's spelled
E-M-W-A-V-E. And it-- today,
it's all over the world.
And it's over 85
countries people
using emWaves, everything from
educators to Olympic athletes
to business professionals
to hundreds of thousands
of people for their
spiritual practices.
It just goes on
where this is going.
It's amazing.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>MARTIN: And we're
going to demonstrate it.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: There's
two forms, really.
One is this little
handheld unit.
This handheld unit
you can use portably--
>>LISA: Pretty picture's
coming up on the screen.
>>MARTIN: --on the go,
like on an airplane
or like in between things in
your work day-- a lot of ways
that I use my emWave,
the handheld unit.
But it connects to the
computer, to any computer--
a PC, Mac, any of them.
And basically, it allows you
to see the data in real time.
In the handheld
unit, you're seeing
changes in your coherence
level through changes
in a light that's here.
When you plug it
into the computer,
you see a computer
program that allows
you to see your heart
rhythms in real time
and see your coherence
scores changing.
And you can take--
also what's fun
about this is you could take it
out, use it portably, plug it
in and upload the data.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
>>MARTIN: So you can in a way--
>>LISA: So you can
be out and about.
>>MARTIN: --quantify
your progress
in building coherence, which
relates to your transformations
most of the time.
>>LISA: Right, right, exactly.
>>MARTIN: So the way I use it is
I use it to prepare for things,
and I use it to get over things.
>>LISA: So it helps
build resilience,
and that's definitely--
>>MARTIN: It helps
to reduce stress,
and it builds that
resilience in your system.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MARTIN: I've used it in
my morning meditations.
I use it to help guide that to
get the most out of that time
that I have.
And at the end-- near the
end of the day some time,
I'll use it again for a little
while just to sort of shake off
the sort of the
static buildup of--
>>LISA: Oh, that's good.
>>MARTIN: --that I go through
and anyone goes through
during the course of their day.
>>LISA: Actually, that
could help you sleep better,
because the first part of
sleep is downloading and--
>>MARTIN: Yeah, there's
a book that people
can get that associates
this with sleep.
>>LISA: Really?
>>MARTIN: Oh, yeah.
And also, people use
this to help deal
with things like the emotional
weight-- emotional weight loss.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
>>MARTIN: So as I said,
there's a lot of applications--
>>LISA: There's so many.
>>MARTIN: --people can try and
can look on websites and things
and see more about it.
>>LISA: There's so
many things related
to stress that we haven't even
talked about yet, but, yeah.
>>MARTIN: You know that's right.
It's used as a stress reduction
tool in many ways for people.
And one of the ways-- I'll
give you one more example,
then I want you to try it.
One of the things
that I'm most proud of
is the work that the
Institute of HeartMath's
been doing with soldiers in the
military and their families.
And these many,
many stories we've
gotten from military
health professionals
and from soldiers themselves
about the importance
of the emWave.
We're training soldiers.
Now, they're taking
these things with them
into places like
Afghanistan and Iraq.
And they're using them there.
And they're coming home
saying, it was my life saver.
It was the thing that
kept me balanced,
the only thing that helped me.
We've had just
many, many stories
like that that are just
heartwarming stories
to use the phrase.
>>LISA: And ultimately, this is
something we're teaching people
to be able to do themselves,
to deal with PTSD,
and to deal with the effects
of stressful situations,
is learning how to bounce back.
And again, as we
spoke about earlier,
the main causes of
stress is your feeling
of not having enough
time and the feeling
of not having a choice.
So this is something that can
help you boun-- and change
that feeling.
>>MARTIN: Yeah, it begins to
train us how to do that better.
And I'd like you to try it.
Would you do that for me?
>>LISA: I would, yes.
>>MARTIN: All right.
>>LISA: See if you can
get me to calm down.
>>MARTIN: OK.
Put this on your earlobe.
This is a sensor that's going to
pick up a pulse from your ear.
From Lisa's ear in this case.
It's plugged into
the handheld unit,
which is plugged
in to the computer.
>>LISA: I do tend to have a
little bit of a busy life.
>>MARTIN: You do.
>>LISA: I wouldn't be surprised
if it was off the charts a bit.
>>MARTIN: Lets'
see what we have.
What I'm going to
do is hit Start,
and it's going to calibrate
to Lisa's-- her pulse.
It just takes a few seconds.
>>LISA: But what if I'm nervous?
Does it come up?
>>MARTIN: It's going to show.
>>LISA: Oh, great.
>>MARTIN: But that's OK.
But what I want
to do now is just
to try to be normal, not
too nervous or anything.
>>LISA: There is no normal.
>>MARTIN: Is there
a normal for you?
>>LISA: Nope.
>>MARTIN: Like you're
hanging out at the airport.
You're going to catch a plane.
Its on time.
You don't have to
worry about that.
>>LISA: OK.
And your heart rhythms.
So we're seeing now-- I'll get
my arm out of the way here--
we're seeing Lisa's heart
rhythms in real time.
It's sort of a normal pattern.
And you remember that things
like movement, speech,
normal things like
that, are going
to create the sort of the
irregular-looking pattern.
And so it's not bad that we
have this pattern when we first
hook up to an emWave.
But now I want you to
think about some things
in your life that
could be stressful.
>>LISA: Right now?
>>MARTIN: Yes.
And as you think
about that, I want
to point out to everybody
that's watching that you're
seeing her heart rhythm
pattern right here.
Down here, what you're seeing
is her coherence level.
These bars are changing in
real time, every 5 seconds.
They're saying right now that
31% of the time since you
started, you've been in low
coherence, which is normal.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: 40% of
the time, you've
been in what's called
medium coherence, which
means those heart rhythms are
becoming more sine-wave like,
more ordered.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: The quality of
heart-brain communication
is improving.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: And
that's a great step.
It's saying that 16% of the time
you've been in high coherence.
High coherence is like
being in the zone.
It's like being in the flow.
>>LISA: Only 16% of the time?
>>MARTIN: So far.
But we're going to switch that.
Right now you're
thinking about things
that could be stressful for you.
And you can see what's
happening in real time.
You're seeing that happen
in real time on the screen
right now.
>>LISA: Yeah, that's amazing.
So this is me feeling anxiety?
This is me feeling like
I'm judging myself?
>>MARTIN: Does that look
like you feel inside?
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARTIN: OK.
But now, let's switch it.
And I'd like you to do a very
simple HeartMath technique.
>>LISA: I'm stuck on the
fact that I have-- OK, great.
>>MARTIN: We're going to
change the coherence score.
You're going to have to do
your work on the inside.
And I'd like everyone
who's watching the show
to go ahead and
do it themselves.
This is a very simple technique
you can use any time, anywhere.
>>LISA: OK.
No matter where you are in
your life-- stressful family,
stressful life, stressful job--
this is what we're teaching.
>>MARTIN: Three steps.
Close your eyes, please.
First step is
called heart focus.
I just want you to shift, like
feel the energy coming down
from your head right into
the center of your chest,
into the area of the heart.
And just focus your attention
there, casually and gently.
And now what I'd
like you to do is
I'd like you to begin to
breathe naturally and normally,
but just a little bit deeper
than you normally would.
And breathe as if that breath
is coming in and out right
through the center
of your chest.
And that's called
heart-focused breathing.
Nice deep breaths, in and
out through the center
of your chest.
Heart-focused breathing.
>>LISA: I can feel my heartbeat.
>>MARTIN: Good.
I want you to maintain
your heart focus
and keep doing that
heart-focused breathing.
But now we're going to go to the
third and most important step.
It's called heart feeling.
I want you to feel the
love or care, for example,
that you have for
someone in your life.
In your case, I know you
have a daughter that you're
really, really close to.
Feel that love and care
you have for Kayla.
For others that are
doing the technique,
it can be just a
feeling of well-being,
like things are really
OK in your life,
or feeling, perhaps,
if you have,
when you know you've
been appreciated,
you know when you've
done well, you
know when you've
accomplished something.
Those are positive
emotions, too.
They don't have to be grandiose.
They can be just good old solid
feelings of life's alright;
everything's fine.
But in your case,
Lisa, if you want
to feel that love, that
care, that appreciation
you have for your daughter,
that would be wonderful.
But keep going with
your heart focus,
your heart-focused
breathing, and then feel
that heart feeling.
You're doing just great.
OK, what I'm going
to do now, Lisa,
is I'm going to stop
this from going.
And I'll show you what you did.
>>LISA: Oh, there
it is in real time.
It's nice to have a break
to be able to just--
I mean, how often in your day
do you really get a chance
to think of that beautiful
image in your mind of your baby
sleeping?
It's not that often.
>>MARTIN: It's
always there, though.
>>LISA: It's always there, yeah.
>>MARTIN: When you started
out, I stopped the program
and restarted it, so we
could see a difference.
You had like, you know,
10% high coherence.
Now, after doing it
with the technique--
>>LISA: Oh, goodness.
>>MARTIN: --you're at 27.
You're on a camera
right now, you're
doing a live television show.
And so there's naturally going
to be some more nervousness
than you would have, say,
in a regular daily activity
situation.
So to get 49% medium
coherence and 27% high
coherence is a great
accomplishment.
>>LISA: In how many seconds?
That's amazing.
>>MARTIN: Well, we did it
for a couple minutes there.
>>LISA: Oh, a couple-- Wow.
>>MARTIN: But just
that shift in focus
from the chaotic
rhythmic pattern
to be able to see the more
smooth and harmonious pattern.
Now, if you would, I'd like
you to hand me the sensor.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: And what I'm
going to do is show you
and everyone who's
watching what's possible.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: Because my
physiology is just
like anyone else's physiology.
It's not different than
someone else's, it's the same.
But because I practice
more, I have the ability
to make some of these
shifts a little bit quicker.
And the reason I want
to demonstrate this
is just to show the listeners
and viewers that-- what's
possible, that you can shift in
and out of this coherent state.
>>LISA: So you've practiced.
You're--
>>MARTIN: Yes, of course, yeah.
>>LISA: --I mean, for years.
>>MARTIN: --and that you
can make these shifts really
quickly.
That it's not a process that's
something dawning that people
can't get to, that with a
little practice you can do that.
And if you can learn to shift in
and out of that coherent state,
think about the
usefulness of that.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>MARTIN: You're going
along, things are busy.
You take a minute, you
pause, you make the shift,
you bring in that
coherence, you open up
another level of
heart-brain communication,
you open yourself up to things
like intuitive intelligence,
you give yourself a boost from
a physiological perspective that
adds to your resilience,
and, if you do that often,
then life gets better.
>>LISA: So you open yourself
up to your intuition,
making better decisions,
thinking clearer,
reducing, of course, stress.
But reducing the stress is
not a conversation in this.
This is about where
you're moving towards.
This is about what does
create that type of coherence
and how to change and
shift right away, no matter
what environment you're in.
That's amazing that you
could even use that.
So how many years have
you been practicing this?
OK, you can't talk,
because you're doing this.
OK, all right, good.
So the bottom line
is-- the point
is that we can do
this ourselves,
that we can take any
situation that you're
in-- you can go from
a work environment,
you can go from
busy moms, you can
go from being in an
argument, travel, all sorts
of economic situations,
all that to situations
where-- that are more coherent.
Well, look at that.
>>MARTIN: Look at that screen.
>>LISA: Ballet movement.
>>MARTIN: I was unable to talk--
and I apologize for that--
just because speech is going
to affect the heart rhythms.
But point I'm making is in
the middle of an interview--
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>MARTIN: --I can go
right from the interview
into that perfect
sine-wave-like pattern,
with very little time delay and
89% high coherence and do it.
>>LISA: Get out!
Wow!
Look at that!
>>MARTIN: And that's the
skill that I want everybody
to get and to be able to learn.
And there are many techniques
in the HeartMath system
for a variety of things--
everything from project
planning to decision making,
to communication-- lots
of techniques that
we have in the system
itself that people learn through
heart mastery and training
programs, and things.
But the basic core
of it is learning
to make this internal shift,
to shift these emotional states
in the moment, moment
to moment, day to day,
and bring ourselves
into that coherent state
periodically during
the course of the day.
That's where people can
achieve great benefit.
And that relates down
to what is spirituality
when it comes down
to practicality?
It's really about changing
our internal environment
and being able to manage that.
>>LISA: It's about
the decisions.
You just made a decision sitting
here to get into coherence.
And granted, Howard's
practiced a lot more,
but to make that-- I mean, I
was even able to increase it.
And just making a decision.
>>MARTIN: That's right.
You're making a decision.
And I've worked with people
in training environments,
of course, in places
now we're going
to do a program-- let's
say it's a two-day program.
Somebody will try the emWave
on a break or something,
and they'll come up
to me later and say,
I can't get into high coherence.
And I'll say, just keep
doing what I shared with you
and practice a little bit.
Usually, by the next
day, they come back
to me excitedly saying
that now they're
getting like 80% high coherence.
It can be that quick once
you catch the flow of it all.
>>LISA: I know.
And the important thing is that
it's-- this is not this device
making you being coherent.
It is the coherence
that's affecting--
>>MARTIN: It's
measuring what you're
doing to yourself on
the internal level.
>>LISA: It's measuring.
>>MARTIN: The emWave itself
is doing nothing to you.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: It's a
tool that's being
used to monitor
what happens inside.
>>LISA: So what we were talking
about earlier about the fact
that the heart emits
signals, that the thoughts
and your feelings
emit signals is,
as you can see here and
through the demonstration
on the screen, is real.
And it's not just something
that you-- I mean,
this is something that
actually emanates from you
and goes out into your--
in your energy field.
So-- There's actually
another technique
that you have as well
that you wanted to share.
>>MARTIN: Oh, yes, the
inner ease technique.
Think about it this way.
This is called the
inner ease technique.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: If you think about
things in terms of energetics,
in terms of energies, and in
terms of different things,
emotions are like energies.
There is a different energy
feeling from, let's say,
care versus appreciation.
They have a different feeling
about them, don't they?
>>LISA: Yeah, yeah.
>>MARTIN: Care has this sort of
rounded, wonderful, soft kind
of feeling to it.
Appreciation's got
a zing to it, even
in the way the sonics of it are.
It's like champagne bubbles.
It's got a different thing.
So all of these
different feelings
have different sort
of frequencies,
and they relate differently
to energy fields,
the ones we produce and the
ones that we interact with.
Ease is one of
those frequencies.
It's an energy and a feeling.
It's not just take it easy.
>>LISA: Ah, that gives a
whole new reason to that.
>>MARTIN: Yeah, it's a feeling
that we can learn to access.
It's part of like the new
intelligence package that
is coming into the world
today as consciousness
begins to go through changes.
It's a different sort of
feeling and the energy to it
that really sort of rounds the
corners, the edges off of life
and makes things less harsh
and less tough to deal with.
It's a feeling that
sort of sets up
a buffer that can deflect stress
before it even gets to us.
>>LISA: Is this what
resilience is or is it
the step before resilience?
>>MARTIN: This is what
would feed resilience.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: Ease, obviously,
increases coherence.
Coherence and
resilience are linked.
But it's the ease technique,
whether we used an emWave
or we didn't, that's really
what's important here.
To me it's got a smooth,
silky feeling to it, you know,
that just feels really
nice inside my system.
It is more common balance.
It has a certain flow to it.
But it is not
putting me to sleep.
It's still engaged with life.
It's like a doorway into a
whole nother place for me--
>>LISA: Nice.
>>MARTIN: --and
effectiveness that's
really, really important.
The ease feeling is
bringing the heart
into the process to help guide
the mind and emotions as we
navigate our way through life.
As we go through a day to day,
we have all these thoughts,
we have all these feelings,
we have all this stuff--
>>LISA: The mind chatter.
>>MARTIN: If I
bring the ease in,
it's like giving me a
better navigational package,
like my own internal GPS
goes up another level,
allowing me to see
into things, still
to see around the corners
in the way of life,
and to make better
decisions about things.
>>LISA: Sounds great.
>>MARTIN: The way I use it, I
start my day out in the morning
and I do my own
heart-focused work
and only spend 15
minutes with it.
I use my emWave.
I hook it up to my ear,
just a portable version.
It has audio tunes
that let you know
when you're in medium
or high coherence.
So I'll hear those to let
me kind of where I am.
And that helps to keep
me sort of on track
better, rather than
floating around, thinking
about the meeting
I have coming up.
Or in case of this
morning, in the hotel,
thinking about all
the things I needed
to do for this interview.
>>LISA: Right.
>>MARTIN: It was like
time to let that go.
So I kind of see the visual
image that I sometimes use is,
you know, we've
seen those movies
where these guys'll have
these computer screens,
they're almost like
sitting up in the air,
and they'll be trying
to do something,
and then they'll take--
wipe this off to the side,
wipe that off the
side, and all that.
They're moving data around.
So I like to take
all the stuff I'm
trying to-- the thoughts and
the feelings and things that
are going on me, just push
them off to the side like that
and just open myself up to
bring in the ease frequency.
>>LISA: Nice.
>>MARTIN: And I just bring that
ease frequency into my system.
Now, ease is also very
important for stress reduction.
It's a stress reduction
technique, for sure.
So it has that
application to it as well.
So what I want to do in
our time together today
is for you and I to do the
ease technique together.
>>LISA: Oh, good, all right,
we get to do it together.
>>MARTIN: We get
to do it together.
And the first thing is to
go ahead and acknowledge
whenever we're
stressed, it's OK.
Acknowledge the feeling
that we're having stress.
>>LISA: It's a great
reality check anyway.
>>MARTIN: And say, look,
I'm dealing with stress.
It's OK, but that's what's
going on with me right now.
And to be open and
acknowledge that.
There's nothing wrong
with acknowledging
that we feel stress.
The first step is to
really acknowledge that.
The second step of the
ease technique, and we'll
do this now.
If you want to, you
can close your eyes.
So just do just like we did in
the other technique I shared,
which was just a quick
coherence technique.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: Just the focus,
again, in the area of the heart.
When you do that,
you're really starting
to order more of the
cardio electricities
that are produced by the
heart when you focus.
>>LISA: I'm gonna fall asleep
by the end of the show.
OK, go ahead.
[LAUGHS]
>>MARTIN: I'm going
to wake you back up.
And then I want you to do the
heart-focused breathing again.
So you heart-focus and your
heart-focused breathing.
And now, gently
and casually just
trying to find a feeling of
ease, a smooth, silky feeling,
something you're
learning to tune to,
something as-- An energy or
a frequency that I'm still
learning to tune more to.
So just as best you
can right now, just
find that feeling of ease,
just that wonderful feeling
inside that's sort of
taking the edges off
of life, taking the
stress out of life.
>>LISA: I've got that
Eagles song in my mind--
(SINGING) I've got a peaceful--
>>MARTIN: Just breathe it
right through the heart,
ease-- nice ease feeling.
As you do that, you're
accumulating energy
in your system, you're building
up your own resilience bank
account.
You know, that's gonna--
Every moment any of us spend
in a time like this is
adding energy to our system.
As we add more
than we take away,
then it begins to magnetize
different life experiences
to us; it creates
a new life for us.
It begins to create a new
reality for ourselves.
But it starts with doing
things like this-- finding that
ease inside.
Now, you can open your eyes,
but the most important step,
the fourth step, is
what do we do with this?
Taking it, moving it forward in
our day, and actualizing it--
>>LISA: Well, practical
application of it, yeah.
>>MARTIN: --actualizing
that feeling
and trying to maintain
it and hold on
to it as we go through the day.
The way I do that
is, you know, there
are times that I
call in-betweens.
In-betweens are
when I'm not really
just focused right on something.
I've walked out of the meeting--
>>LISA: Transition.
>>MARTIN: --walked
out of the meeting,
I'm going back to my office.
I have 10 minutes
before I have to be
on the phone or something.
That's an in-between time.
And so I go back to the ease
feeling in my in-betweens.
You know, sit down and
close my eyes and all that.
But, you know, I just go-- start
breathing that ease feeling.
>>LISA: It's there.
>>MARTIN: So I try
to keep sustaining it
during the course of the
day so that it's there
with me during the
course of the day.
And just to breathe that feeling
in and out through the heart.
And then, of course, when I'm
in the middle of the activity,
I can refer back to it again.
I've been doing that
in the interview.
But a lot of times, you
really do need be focused,
you need to be on, you
need be conversational,
you've got to make decisions
and things like that.
So you can't
necessarily always be
that in the forefront
of consciousness.
But I can go back to it.
And at the end of the day,
a lot of times for me, Lisa,
I can tell whether I really
applied myself in that regard--
>>LISA: So you don't
feel as stressful
at the end of the day.
So this is a technique that
you can practice at home.
Please, do this at home.
>>MARTIN: Yes, please.
>>LISA: This is one of those
things, please do at home.
The more you practice this
going in and out of ease, then
the end of your day,
you get a lot more--
>>MARTIN: Right, and
I can still be tired.
>>LISA: And-- I'm sorry,
and you could also--
there's a difference between
ease and coherence, though,
right?
Coherence is more of
that optimal state.
>>MARTIN: Well, ease is,
again, a technique that
creates more coherence
in your system.
>>LISA: OK.
>>MARTIN: If we were to
do the emWave right now,
and you practiced
the ease technique,
you'd very likely see your
coherence level increase.
So it's a way-- part of
HeartMath is a system,
it's not just to talk
about things conceptually,
it's to do things like have
techniques that then tie
to technology so that you
have a package of things that
makes sense, that give it a
comprehensive understanding
of what someone's trying to do.
>>LISA: And to understand
the difference, though,
between relaxation
and coherence is
where relaxation is
something that you
could get a little
sleep, you relax.
Coherence is that optimal state
where you're at the beach,
but you hear the
seagulls, you recognize
the rhythm of the
waves, you've got--
you're aware of the people
and the things around you.
And then it's like that
field of peak-- of peakness.
And then you can transfer that
to a workplace, where you're
operating in a place of
coherence, where things are--
And then you start to
attract the things to you
that you think about.
It's a whole nother
level of being.
>>MARTIN: That's right.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>MARTIN: Relaxation's
trying to balance things out.
And it's good.
And I'm all for anything
that takes people deeper
within and helps
them today, including
relaxation techniques.
Coherence is just something
that's different than that.
And you described it very well.
I don't even want
to try to add to it
from a descriptive standpoint.
The only thing I
will say about it
that may sort of put a
period on that sentence
is that we train athletes
in coherence building
and training-- Olympic athletes,
professional golfers, PGA tour
golfers, kickers in football--
in professional football--
people like that.
Why?
Because they want
those athletes to be
able to understand
that coherent state,
because it's a
high-performance state.
It doesn't mean that we're
in the middle of the activity
that they're in that
they're thinking about that.
But what happens when they
use emWaves and practice
coherence-building techniques
is their natural coherence
baseline increases.
>>LISA: Interesting, right?
That's your practice.
>>MARTIN: As they
practice, it increases.
And so they're operating--
where they start out
is at a different place
from where they were.
And that's-- to your point--
it is not just about relaxing,
it's about having a
casual, relaxed flow
in a high-performance life.
>>LISA: Oh, well,
but not only that,
but this could help
with people who
are stuck without finding
purpose in their life,
stuck in a dead-end job, to
get to that place of being
able to be switched on, to
fire the neurons moving,
to get yourself out of that job
that you don't like, or find
that new-- get yourself out
of the abusive relationship,
or get yourself into
a place of health.
Say, for example, you need
to change your eating habits
because your health
is being threatened,
get into that
optimal zone of what
it feels like to be in coherence
of eating healthy, feeling
clean, exercising, doing-- It
gets-- how many people can't
get to the gym or wherever they
want to do with their exercise?
It will help you
get to that place.
So coherence is more than
just a relaxation technique;
it is the optimal state.
It's like Joseph
Chilton Pearce talks
about the zone of kids at play.
Kids at play are in their
peak performance zone.
I watch this all the
time with my daughter.
In her imaginary play life, that
is her Olympic athlete state.
And it's the optimum
state for children.
>>MARTIN: Coherence occurs
naturally in nature.
And it occurs in
things like children,
like you mentioned,
when you play.
A lot of things where
coherence shows up.
And we can bring ourselves
back to that state more.
It's really our natural state.
>>LISA: It is.
>>MARTIN: And it's really
where we're supposed to be.
So it's returning
back to natural--
>>LISA: And you don't need
caffeine to get there.
>>MARTIN: And it's not trying
to take the fun out of life;
it's just find-- finding
the flow of life.
But you know, I said something
in the beginning of our time
together, where I said that
when I was describing what heart
meant to me, that it gave me
the ability to do what I usually
can't or often can't.
And this-- now we've
gone through a lot
of different subjects to reach
back around to this point,
but that-- you said it well.
This coherent state is
a state where we really
are doing our very best.
It's the flow--
>>LISA: It's balance.
It's the state of balance
everyone wants to achieve.
>>MARTIN: Yes, so we've gone
through a lot of science
and a lot of
understanding to reach
some of these conclusions.
And then it becomes a
matter of many people today
and many people who probably
are watching the show,
they want to improve
their own lives,
so they have needs there.
But they also want to
make a bigger contribution
to the world itself.
There's an internal longingness
inside their own hearts,
saying I want to make a
difference, I want to give.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
>>MARTIN: And that's where we
talked about global coherence,
creating global
coherence in our project.
But there are many projects.
But how do we contribute
energetically?
So someone who does not
have the ability or time
to get involved in
anything specific
can still make a huge
contribution to the shift
and to the world simply by
changing their own heart.
>>LISA: Isn't that interesting?
>>MARTIN: As the old saying
goes, a change of heart
changes everything.
And I think at
HeartMath, we're showing
that that's real from
physiological to psychological,
it's a real process.
And everybody can do that.
And that's the beauty of it.
And when I think about my friend
Doc Childre and what he set up
to create, it's like-- the
beautiful simplicity of it all,
that he was able to
identify that we have made
into a sophisticated system
with ways in which we offer
this to people and businesses
and all kinds of things.
And, you know, through
our nonprofit, I mean,
just the work that they do
alone with kids and families,
and through the membership
that they offer,
it's just one part of HeartMath,
but it's such an important one,
science and all these things.
And I know I'm
self-aggrandizing right now,
but I'm really proud of
what HeartMath's done.
And I'm proud to say that
the heart of HeartMath
in the midst of all the
complexity and the growth
is stronger than it's ever been.
>>LISA: The heart of HeartMath?
>>MARTIN: The heart of
HeartMath, the real motivation
and the mission that
we set out to do.
>>LISA: Well, the mission
is very important,
and it's helping
people understand
that they can achieve
balance in their own lives
and then they can
move away from stress
into a place of coherence.
But what you said about being
the part of a bigger whole
and about being
of service, it is
said that the best way to
self-healing is to help others.
And that is something that
establishes coherence.
And thinking of
coherence as being
in that place of
an optimal state
is a peak-performance
state is the best
way that I can see it here.
But it's also being
in the heart space.
And peace starts with yourself.
>>MARTIN: That's right.
>>LISA: And so if
you're going to start
from that place of
peace and really
make a huge difference--
And the great thing,
you could look at Global
Coherence Initiative
and see the difference that it's
making and look at the cycles
and so forth that it's making.
That's great that you are able
to quantify something like that
and that you put something
like that together.
>>MARTIN: Yeah, it is.
And at the same
time, I think, what's
most important about
it is that we're
providing a place
that a lot of people
can resonate with that
brings people together
into a community.
>>LISA: Community is
another good point.
>>MARTIN: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yeah.
Are people forming
communities around?
>>MARTIN: Yeah, they are.
We've stayed out of trying
to orchestrate that.
There's self-forming communities
of Global Coherence Initiative,
people around the world
who are finding each other,
who are having their own
get-togethers and meetings,
and things like
that, because they
want to be a part
of something larger.
And community's
important right now.
People are looking for
cooperation and harmony.
>>LISA: Yeah, and community.
What's next for you?
Where do you go from here?
You've got these
great things going.
And what's next for HeartMath?
>>MARTIN: Well, I
think what's next
for us is continuing to find
the best ways possible to get
whatever we have
to offer right now,
because we're at a critical
juncture in history,
and we are making choices today
that are going to have impact
on our future for years to come.
>>LISA: I've heard
about the tipping point
that we're at, yeah.
>>MARTIN: This interview
is being recorded in 2011.
People talk about 2012.
My feeling is that choices
we're making today,
right here in this
moment, are the ones that
will be energized by
what happens in 2012.
So 2011, 2012, the
years right after that--
these are important times.
Never before have we been
in such an important time.
So at HeartMath what's next for
us is how do we better do that?
So we're moving-- our
business models and things.
We're getting more into mobile
applications, an iPhone app, so
all these different things.
>>LISA: That is so cool.
So you could use your mobile
phone to obtain coherence?
>>MARTIN: Eventually,
emWaves will be on phones.
>>LISA: That's great.
>>MARTIN: And a lot
of things like that.
>>LISA: Because they
usually distract you
from that place of coherence.
>>MARTIN: Yeah, and also just
getting more techniques out
there through our training
programs and processes,
and things like that.
So a lot of it's about--
it's-- we're very creative
at HeartMath.
So, we can develop
many new things.
And we always have
that going on.
But it's also about
how do we get better
at getting it to the people?
How do we get better at
disseminating what we have?
And that involves how do
we have more people know
about us for starters.
It also involves how do we
get better at doing that?
How do we are better at being
a fully-functional nonprofit
and a for-profit business.
How do those systems work better
so that it's easier for people
to-- get what they need from us.
And so that's some of the
thoughts that I have in my role
as a business person.
It's like, it's not
so much about how
do we make more money,
but it's focusing
on how do we get
better at serving
the needs of our customers
and the people who
want to participate
in HeartMath.
>>LISA: So is it more
focused on the individual
than it is focused on the
global aspects of it all?
>>MARTIN: A lot of
it's on organizational.
A lot of our training
programs today
are happening in
health care systems.
Large health care institutions
are training their people
in HeartMath.
That's one area that we do.
And I mentioned
military earlier--
>>LISA: Health care is great.
>>MARTIN: --and
things like that.
We have programs-- we're
still doing corporations
as well in corporate America.
But there is a
training process there;
it's in between, sort of,
the individual and then
the macro, the global.
There's an organizational
component in there as well.
As I mentioned earlier, we
work a lot of different levels
and layers at HeartMath
to get that job done.
And I just think
that what's next
for me is staying true to
what's guided me all along.
And there's two things.
One was that dedication early
in my life to continuous growth.
>>LISA: Continuous growth?
>>MARTIN: And the other was
a dedication early in my life
to service to others.
And as long as I
keep doing that,
then things will take
care of themselves.
And I keep following the
flow of my own heart.
>>LISA: That's a great model.
>>MARTIN: And we'll let
the rest unfold from there.
And as long as I stay
there, I'll be OK.
But it's a time of
great opportunity
and great challenge
for everybody,
and that includes me as well.
>>LISA: Well, these
are wise solutions,
like what you have with
the HeartMath Solution.
And the idea of the
simplest technique
that you can do with getting
in and aligning yourself
with that place of coherence
is the way to shift individuals
and to obtain that
place of balance,
and to start from the heart,
understanding now and seeing
the science behind the fact
that the heart emits signals
and receives signals
at the same time.
It's not all orchestrated
from the mind and the brain,
but it can be, and
that that then makes
a difference in our human
energy field, in our ionosphere,
and affects the entire planet.
>>MARTIN: Great summary.
>>LISA: Well, I learned a lot.
>>MARTIN: Good.
>>LISA: So I thank
you so much, Howard.
You have made a
massive contribution
to the world of consciousness
and de-stressing people's
lives, really.
>>MARTIN: Well,
I'm so appreciative
and really humbled about the
opportunities that I do have.
And because it didn't have
to be this way for me.
There's a lot of things that
have taken place in my life
that I have to see as
grace and as a gift.
And that would be
things like being
able to have a time with
you to be on a program
like Gaiam's producing here.
So I really appreciate
that as well.
And what motivates me
today is to say, well,
if these kind of
things can happen
to me-- not everybody's
going to be on TV--
but if I can find fulfillment
that exceeded my expectation,
then others can as well.
And that's what I
want for people.
And that's why I do what I do.
>>LISA: Well, I'm glad we've
exceeded your expectations.
Thank you so much.
You have as well.
And thank you so much for
the impact that you've made.
And I know that people
will be inspired from this
and understand that it's
very easy to obtain coherence
and then, again,
to obtain balance.
>>MARTIN: Lisa, you
take care, darling.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
>>MARTIN: OK.
>>LISA: Thanks, Howard.